Systems Research and Behavioral Science
Syst. Res. 23, 39^49 (2006)
Published online inWiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com)
DOI:10.1002/sres.745

&

Research Paper

Autopoiesis and Knowledge in the
Organization: Conceptual Foundation
for Authentic Knowledge Management
Aquiles Limone* and Luis E. Bastias
Commerce School, Faculty of Economics and Management, Pontiﬁcia Universidad Católica de Valparaiso, Chile

Traditionally, Knowledge Management (KM) has focused primarily on the implementation of information technologies, with greater emphasis being placed on technology rather
than on information or knowledge, understanding them as epistemological entities. This
has had serious consequences, for there is the risk of converting KM in a mere fashion or
even a commercial name designed to sell certain Information Technology tools. This
paper suggests that authentic knowledge management must start with the study of the
cognitive phenomena inside the enterprise. It should not be related only with individual
knowledge and learning, but rather mainly to organizational knowledge and learning.
This paper also suggests that there is such thing as corporate learning, beyond individual
learning, for both—individuals and corporations—are cognitive systems. The scientiﬁc
arguments supporting that corporations, regarded as systemic wholes, are indeed cognitive
systems lie in the understanding of the enterprise as an autopoietic entity. The fact that the
enterprise is an autopoietic system implies that not only it has the capacity to acquire
knowledge, but also that knowledge itself, understood as effective action, determines the
viability and, indeed, the very existence of the enterprise. Hence, Knowledge Management
ceases to be an alternative administrative tool and becomes an inherent necessity for the
proper functioning of the enterprise. Copyright # 2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Keywords Knowledge Management (KM); autopoiesis; epistemology; information; Information
Technology; cybernetics; cognitive processes; cognition; cognitive sciences; theory of the
organization
INTRODUCTION

* Correspondence to: Aquiles Limone, Commerce School, Faculty of
Economics and Management, Pontiﬁcia Universidad Católica de
Valparaiso, Chile. E-mail: alimone@ucv.cl

Copyright # 2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Today the concept of knowledge undoubtedly
arouses interest for those who study or are
involved in business management and the
economic dynamics of societies, especially in
the framework of the crucial transformation
Received 20 August 2004
Accepted 25 July 2005

RESEARCH PAPER
associated with the phenomenon generally
known as ‘globalization’.
For almost 15 years, a variety of notable
authors have concerned themselves with the
enormous utility of this concept and others—
information, data, learning, creativity and innovation among others—associated with competitiveness. A series of relevant traits have been
suggested as the result of the management and
generation of knowledge.
The success of companies that demonstrate
creativity.
* The ability of some ﬁrms to adapt to profound
changes in the work environment (changes in
fashion and taste, in technology, in the world
order, etc.)
* The ability to consistently excel and maintain a
position as market leader.
* The ability to capture and retain customers.
* The ability to assure timely, properly priced,
and reliable supply by managing its relations
with suppliers and others, too numerous to
mention here, through an ability to add value
to its products or services.
*

Authors of the stature of P. Drucker, I. Nonaka,
P. Senge, A. de Geuss, D. Garvin, Ch. Argyris, J.
B. Quinn, among others, have repeatedly emphasized this topic, suggesting that this may be the
most momentous change of the century, whose
consequences will be none other than the most
profound transformation of the ‘reality’ in which
we live.
Although there may be no doubt as to the
importance of the concept of knowledge, its
epistemological status generates certain disquiet,
as do the various terms employed by the various
authors when referring to it.
Intellectual concern about the topic and the
concept of knowledge is nothing new. To the
contrary, its study is rooted in the most pristine
anxieties of humanity and there is a long,
philosophical tradition surrounding it. In the
Western culture this tradition dates back to the
pre-Socratic philosophers. Epistemology, both in
its original consideration as a branch of philosophy and as its more recent consideration as a
scientiﬁc discipline (experimental epistemology),
has had the nature of knowledge as its central
Copyright  2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

40

Syst. Res.
object of study—What is it? How is it disseminated? How is it conserved? How is it validated?
Nevertheless, it is not common to ﬁnd references
to this tradition or to the scientiﬁc depictions
referring to the nature and generation of
knowledge in studies dealing with Knowledge
Management (KM). In our opinion this consideration should constitute the starting point for
any reﬂection on the matter. In this regard, the
approach of E. Bueno, of the U. Autónoma de
Madrid, seems quite appropriate when he
states, ‘This development in economic thought
of considering knowledge as a critical resource
and as the objective of the creation of value, has
been quite successful. At the same time it is
introducing greater complexity and a certain
degree of confusion of concepts, terms, models,
proposals, and other mental developments at the
end of the 20th century. And it seems that it will
continue doing so in the ﬁrst years of the 21st
century’. ‘The profusion of terms, occasionally
amounting to linguistic nonsense, ﬂippancy as to
the way the concept is used, ignorance of the
classical categories of thought and the frivolous
abuse of fashions and of pseudo-scientiﬁc and
postmodernist movements are constructing a new
‘‘Tower of Babel’’, provoking injustice and unease
in the unnecessary formulation and accelerated
substitution of propositions of new models and
expressions without allowing them to mature
and without making even a minimal effort to
contrast them to prior ones . . . At the present time,
the lack of agreement, of order, of objectivity, and
the social explanation in this ﬁeld of knowledge is
an ‘‘objective reality’’’ (Bueno, 2001).
On the other hand, the excessive emphasis that
has been placed on Information Technology—
which, as we will see below, reﬂects only one of
the schools of thought in relation to the generation of knowledge—has tended to deform and
displace the centre of attention from the heart of
the problem to the merely instrumental. Such a
displacement has in many cases allowed ‘Knowledge Management’ to become just another
fashion in the ﬁeld of Business Administration,
just another commercial term devised to sell
certain software and hardware tools to businesses—avid for solutions to problems that arise
in the current working environment. However,
Syst. Res. 23, 39^49 (2006)

Aquiles Limone and Luis E. Bastias

Syst. Res.
beyond fashion, the subject of knowledge today
is not only important but also crucial to a
profound understanding of the true nature of
an organization and the processes that allow it to
sustain itself over time. In the remainder of this
paper we propose to demonstrate and support
this last assertion.

WHAT IS KNOWLEDGE? HOW
IS IT GENERATED?
As we have already alluded to above, there
is a long, philosophical tradition underlying
the area of knowledge that should be studied
and analysed in order to adequately deal
with this subject. Likewise, there is an abundant
bibliography in the scientiﬁc ﬁeld, which
deals with it, particularly beginning with the
advent of cybernetic science during the 20th
century.
In the philosophical tradition, the oldest
epistemological reﬂections are mixed with the
ontological and metaphysical reﬂections, at least
during the periods of time that we can call
Antiquity (mainly Greece) and the Middle
Ages. According to Hessen (Hessen, 1926), the
theory of knowledge as an autonomous discipline appears with the work entitled ‘Essay on
Human Understanding’ in 1690 by John Locke,
the English philosopher, in the so-called Modern
Age. On the European continent the celebrated
work by I. Kant in 1781, ‘A Critique of Pure
Reason’ is the starting point. These two landmark works were followed by numerous contributions, by a series of notable philosophers, in
the 18th, 19th and 20th centuries. These works
should not be overlooked when referring to the
subject of knowledge. However, in this paper we
focus fundamentally on the 20th century, or
more precisely on the two main lines of thought
generated by the cybernetic studies in the 1940s
because they bring us not only a philosophical
point of view but also fresh and scientiﬁc
grounding.
Cognitive Science (C. S.) or the Cognitive
Sciences, as designated by others—noting that
there was more than one discipline involved in
its origin—was born with the cybernetic moveCopyright  2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Autopoiesis and Knowledge in the Organization

RESEARCH PAPER
ment of the 1940s. During this founding cybernetic era there was a fundamental concern for the
phenomenon of the mind and intelligence at the
core of the movement. This concern was particularly strongly felt by four brilliant minds:
Norbert Wiener, John Von Neumann, Warren
McCulloch and Gregory Bateson. The ﬁrst two
were mathematicians, McCulloch specialized in
psychology and neurophysiology, and Bateson
was an anthropologist, although he worked in
more than one discipline. At this time the seed
was planted which would ten years later bear
fruit in the form of classic cognitivism beginning in the decade of the 1950s. Following the
distinction suggested by F. Varela (Varela, 2000),
today we may differentiate among three main
lines of thought in cognitive science: cognitivism;
the connectionist approach; and the enactivist
approach.
Cognitivism is the heir of one of the principal
views about the mind and knowledge in cybernetics. This approach is markedly reductionist
and revolves around the thinking of John von
Neumann. This idea ultimately gave rise to the
digital computer. The traditional, generic structure of a digital computer is still known today as
‘Von Neumann’s Machine’.
Given the fact that for von Neumann and his
school of cyberneticists, the human brain processed information, it was natural for them to
view the use of the computer as a metaphor for
the functioning of the brain.
The other main line of thought of the ﬁrst
cyberneticists, suggested by Wiener, McCulloch,
and Bateson, was more organic and systemic.
However, it was overshadowed—provisionally
in this era—by the traditional ‘Von Neumann’
view, which developed rapidly and saw a
meteoric rise and application in the ﬁelds of
information technology, robotics and the ﬁrst
ventures into artiﬁcial intelligence, culminating in
the victory of ‘Deep Blue’, the computer, over the
reigning world chess champion of the time.
Cognitivism was established mainly during the
years 1953–1955 with the contribution of such
authors as H. Simon, N. Chomsky and M. Minsky.
The basic ideas of this era gave foundation to the
principal patterns of modern cognitive science
(Varela, 2000).
Syst. Res. 23, 39^49 (2006)

41

RESEARCH PAPER
The connectionist approach came forward as
an alternative to the symbolic cognitivism and
ﬁnally become a complement, taking up again
the ideas that had been overlooked in the ﬁrst
cybernetic discussions (Wiener, McCulloch, and
Bateson). It favoured the concept of self-organization, which was also beginning to take root
in physics, chemistry, and the development of
nonlinear mathematics. At this point, it is
extremely important to point out the two main
‘ﬂaws’ of cognitivism. Perhaps the best way to do
this is through the words of Francisco Varela:
‘The motivation for a second look at selforganization was based on two widely recognized deﬁciencies. The ﬁrst is that the processing
of symbolic information is based on sequential
norms applied one at a time. This well-known
bottleneck of Von Neumann is a dramatic
limitation when the task in question requires
great quantities of sequential operations (such as
climate prediction or the analysis of natural
images). The permanent search for algorithms
of parallel processing in the classic architectures
has not had much success due to the fact that the
entire computing/computational philosophy has
developed in the opposite direction’.
The second major limitation is that the symbolic processing is localized: the loss of any part
of the symbols or norms of the system implies
signiﬁcant failure in the overall functioning of
the system. In contrast, a distributed operation is
highly desirable, in such a way that there is at
least a relative equipotentiality and an immunity
to mutilations.
This two deviations from cognitivism can be
expressed the same way: the architectures and
the mechanisms are far removed from biology.
The most ordinary, visual tasks, even those
performed by small insects, are carried out faster
than what is physically possible when they are
simulated in a sequential manner. The elasticity
of the mind to face damage without compromising its overall competence has been known by
neurobiologists for a long time.
The above suggests that instead of focusing on
symbols as the point of departure, one could
begin with simple components (non-cognitive)
that connect to each other by forming tight
patterns. With this approach each component
Copyright  2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

42

Syst. Res.
operates only in its local environment, but due to
the structure of the network of the complete
system there is an overall cooperation that
emerges spontaneously when the states of all
